# Billy Murray's, Groundhog day and your life

Groundhog day has always been one of my favorite movies. Watching it
always uplifts me and provides a sense of wonderful epiphanic clarity.
I have always been confused as to why the movie had such a profound
affect on me. It was as if the movie was making a connection to
something deep inside me, but my consious mind couldn't make sense of
it.

I saw the movie again recently and feel like I received the movies
message in a way that I can now process, understand and share. The
following is a analysis of the movie. This analysis has been very
helpful for me and I am hoping that the reader will get something out
of it as well. In order to get the most out of it please re-watch
Groundhog Day again before reading, and then maybe again afterwards.

In Groundhog Day, Bill murray plays Phil Connors a weatherman who in
the beginning of the movie is stuck in an unhealthy relationship to
life. He is narsacistic and obsessed with how he is different and
better than others. He is too good to be working at his job and way
too good to be covering a lowly story about Puxatawneys' grounghog day
celebration. He is stuck in his somewhat adolecent strategy towards
life. He is deeply identified with the story that he is a weatherman
and therefore is "somebody".

Now at this point it is easy to dissmiss Phil and see his behaviour as
abnormal and different from our own but I am going to look at how
someone get's to be this way. I will further state that Phil is all of
us. How does someone become like Phil and do the rest of us have
behaviour that is analogous to Phil's? How does someone get deeply
attached to such an apparently childish strategy to survive in the
world? Well, lets think back to when we were children. Most of us as
children, have experiences that we can and can't remember where we had
an impulse to do something and we were abruptly shut down by our
parents or caretakers. For instance, let's say we were fascinated by
the sound that a spoon makes when it hits the table. In in our
youthful innocence and curiousity we had to explore and hear the sound
over and over again. The sound has a incredible strength and
resonance. There are many things to hear in the sound of a spoon
hitting a table. And while this is fascinating to a baby, it would
drive our parents nuts and they would sometimes dissuade us from this
behaviour gently and sometimes not. So, a rift starts. We would have
these natural innocent inclinations that come from our hearts and the
world would say "NO!! That's BAD!!" And depending on our constitution
this would be viewed as a threat to our existence. Its simply not safe
to have a parent who doesn't like you. You could die. The primitive
logic is brutal. Parent's often say things like "You should know
better". Which as children we can take literally and think that
somehow we are supposed to know ahead of time that which will upset
others in our environment. And so a distrust of our natural
inclinations and a viligence to control our actions grows. We develope
a viligent control system who's purpose is to keep us on the right
side of our parents and societies scorn and keep us alive. This
control system is the critical voices of society and our parents
internalized. The result is that we beleive that our natural
inclinations are at the least suspect or at the most that we
inherently wrong and flawed individuals and that we must invest our
energy into viligance and control in order to survive.

The control system takes on a life of its own and we live in a mystery
and wonder why we don't feel alive even though we have internalized
the rules so well. There are many outward expressions of this in the
world as there are peeople. Many of us are so disconnected we have a
hared time remembering what it is like to be creative, play, love and
listen to our hearts. And here we have Phil and his strategy to live.
"Be someone important". He is trancending the inherent feelling that
there is something deeply wrong with hime by "being someone
important". He is looking for outward evidence that he is not deeply
flawed and that his control strategy is working. But the truth is that
it can never work as there is no solution that is enough for the
control system and we end up living a life dominated by interal voices
that constantly berate our efforts, and tell us something is wrong and
that we are not doing enough in the world. These voices and cues are
intensly egocentric and cut off from the rest of life. From the point
of view of this control system we are in this world by ourselves and
we have to forge our way on our own against the interests of the rest
of the world. The control system can't comprehend the absolute truth
that in actuallity we are all in this together. So goes humanity so we
go. If humainity is egocentric and self serving we all suffer, if
humanity is compassionate then we all flourish.

So Phil is snarky and positioned against his coworkers and absolutely
unaware that they are all on the same mission to do something and that
they need eachother. Phil is further confused that he actually doesn't
control the weather and is actually "stuck" in Puxatawney for an
ubearable evening with the hicks that are below him.

And then the best thing happens to him. His stuckness manifests into
reality. His is forced to stay in Pux and relive the same day over and
over again with no explaination why and no indication that it will
ever end. This is absolutely intolerable to Phil as he is cast into
uncertainty and his strategy of control is undermined, which we have
to remember is deeply threatening (our existence is at stake).

After the shock of his new circumstances wears off he realizes that he
has a new found power. He knows what's going to happen before it
happens and there are no repercussions for his actions as they are all
erased at the start of the next day. He uses this power in a
predicatable way. He exercises greater control of his environment and
lives a hedonsitic lifestyle. He goes after the things that he
(posessed by the strategy of control) thinks will make him happy and
entertain him. As time wears on this strategy eventually doesn't
fullfill. Hedonism never does. Bored he turns towards his authentic
attraction to Rita. A person he unlikely to woo in a day, a person who
is in tune with her heart and humanity. Again he uses the only
strategy he knows the startegy of control. He memorizes the things she
likes, he goes on an epic journey to create the perfect day that will
make her attracted to. He is in love but he doesn't know to do it. And
Rita always senses the fakeness in it. She senses something is off,
because it is off, regardless of his true feelings his strategy is
fake and manipulative. He really doesn't know how to let go and just
be vulnerably himself.

This of course fails hundreds of times and Phil falls into depression.
He is doing the only thing that he knows how to do and it doesn't
work. His best version of himself is fake. It starts to dawn on him
that he really doesn't have control at all. He then commits suicide
over and over again only to wake up the next day without a scratch. He
then realizes that in reality, he has no control. He is beyond hope
that strategy and control will ever help him. He is hopeless and out
of answers.

And this is where the magic happens. Out of answers and strategies he
is left with nothing else to do but express what hes going though
authentically and vulnerably to Rita. And how does Rita respond? She
responds with compassion and care vowing to spend the day with him as
a witness his to experience. Phil has a good day, a day without
manipulation as himself, and Rita cares for him as he is. This is the
magic that turns it around for Phil and maybe the subtlest aspect of
the movie, the part of the film that I didn't understand for the
longest time.  

Phil doesn't hang out with Rita on the next day. Somethings changed.
He has experienced being seen and accepted as he is. That opens up a
window to himself, to his heart and it feels good. There is something
else to do besides control, he can listen to the quiet voice of his
heart. There are things that he wants to do that will bring him joy.
He learns that he sincerely wants to read poetry and classics. He
wants to help people. He sincerely wants to learn to play music. These
things have always been there but hidden. He is experiencing the
freedom of learning how to be wholly himself.  

I think its easy at this point in the movie to think that he is
endevouring through control and strategy to create the perfect day, I
don't think this is the case. I think he is simply listening to the
gentle guidence of his heart. And as he listens more deeply he the day
becomes more fullfilling until his final day.

His final day starts with a broadcast where he delivers a heart moving
monolouge about how he couldn't wish for anything more than a long
winter warmed by the hearts and hearths of the puxt people. Rita is
drawn to his sincere love of life. She tries attempts to spend time
with him, but he is too busy living and loving his life. He has a full
schedule of people to help a full life to lead. He has moved past
living a live focused on protecting his wounds and supporting his ego.
He has moved past his neediness.

Through out the day Rita gets glimpses of Phils life. She sees him ice
scuplting and fully paticipating in life. At the end of the day she
catches up with him playing piano at the Ground Hog evening dance. He
of course is playing piano marvelously. It's important to note that he
is not here to bask in adoring attention. He in not playing piano to
be the cool guy in the front of the room, he is doing it because he
sincerely wants to share and play. Thats all he has ever wanted to do.
The adoration is a bonus and a reflection of the true love that he has
for life and himself.

Phil is then autioned off at the bachelors auction. A bidding war
ensues and Rita representing someone who is in touch with life and her
own heart, has no problem recognizing what she had to do, even if it
meant bidding everything in her checking account to win Phil.



 